Will I start now, Gavin?
…5 of May 1970.
Actually, that also came
very spontaneously
because the atmosphere
was not ready as yet,
and the evolutionary last jump
of human beings into the unconscious
was organized and arranged
and thought of.
But the time to do that
was depending on many factors.
The first factor, the foremost factor
was, how far human beings
have been able to keep them
in the central path.
That was the most important.
Because as far as the development
of the intelligence was concerned,
or say the ego and superego
was concerned, the process was over.
It was just fixed.
This happened the time I was born.
And when this body came on this earth,
it came with all its symbols.
That's why so many people saw
this big chakra coming.
It exists in the Sahasrara.
And they saw also the cross coming.
They saw also the Mooladhara symbol,
'swastika'.
But the process of activating
those symbols
started much earlier
than the last one.
This happened on the 5th of May, 1970.
In my own lifetime,
apart from what happened earlier
in this lifetime of mine,
the first chakra of Mooladhara
was activated in the year 1950 or so.
When I was in Shimla, it happened.
The Mooladhara chakra has got,
you know, swastika at emblem.
The swastika completely started
revolving in the sky.
And the chakra formed
a line of the sky.
It opened up.
And through that,
the symbol came out.
And the symbol also then sort of
emitted light.
And that also then opened the sky
even higher.
That's how the first chakra opened up.
I mean, to describe it is very
difficult,
because it's a thing that moves
like the smoke, you see, that moves.
And so to describe it in its whole
appearance is difficult.
Because you see the movement
of the smoke here: it is so mobile.
In the same way, the chakra is also
a very mobile thing.
It is a living, mobile thing.
It changes its form,
becomes bigger, smaller,
expands, revolves, stops.
Now the swastika was the first symbol.
And it's the most important one.
And that started in 1950,
as I told you, when I was in Shimla.
When it happened, after that,
one by one,
the center started opening out
in the sky.
But not there, later on
and later on and later on,
till it came to the Sahasrara.
I won't be able to give you
the complete accounts
on what date and how it happened,
but it's various stages.
As it is, in the evolutionary stages,
you have crossed all these chakras
within yourself.
For example, you have choked,
you have controlled
this Vishuddhi chakra,
you have raised your head fully.
In the primitive people, if you find,
they have got this one bending like this.
But you have got it all right.
And then your ego also developed
quite a lot.
And you are just ready for this Agnya,
when Christ came in
and He also opened this one for you.
But in the human awareness,
now you must understand
that human awareness
is what you are today.
That is what you should call
as human awareness.
There is no limit to it,
because the instrument is the same.
For example, today you can play
one raga with five notes;
notes permutations and combinations,
you know.
But tomorrow, you may learn
to do it even better.
And day after tomorrow, even better.
But it is all linked to one instrument.
So the human instrument is the same,
only your awareness increases.
So from my birth only,
the awareness started increasing.
But especially this Mooladhara's
opening, perhaps,
must be coinciding with the 50s.
I don't know when it started actually,
but it should coincide about that time.
Because that's the time,
the Mooladhara's opening
broke the materialism of us—
materialism.
Because of materialism, you see,
people lost their vision of the reality.
They never thought of the beyond.
And the human beings, sort of,
got materialized into the material.
So, at that time it was necessary
to break
and to bring to their awareness
the knowledge
that the matter is not real.
There is something of the beyond,
one has to go beyond.
And that happened about 1950 or 49.
But that's the time
when I worked in Simla.
It happened for the first time.
I should say it would be 50
or a little earlier, a little bit earlier.
And after that, you see,
this new awareness came into human beings.
That you are the same person,
but you are open to new dimensions.
And this was one of the new dimensions
started.
That matter broke its form,
broke its bondage.
And this first chakra,
means the matter chakra,
is made from the Mother Earth.
And Ganesha is this.
It is through his power it broke.
The bondage of matter
on human beings broke.
First, there was a struggle
between the matter and the Spirit,
but a point came where the bondage
lifted itself in awareness,
in instinctive awareness.
Awareness is through thinking,
in the thoughts, in the inspired thoughts.
People felt that we are under
the bondage of the matter.
So the first thing started.
Gradually, one after another,
if you see,
it's clearly in those 50 years,
suddenly the creativity started.
It triggered because of
the Swadisthana,
people became very creative,
in a sense, coloured now.
If you remember in London,
say, before 1950,
people used to wear only a very odd black.
And they would not, I mean,
even smile at people.
They were so grey.
And everything was so grey.
And nobody believed in any colour.
Even Americans, they were very grey
people before that.
But then, the colour started coming up
and people started believing in colours.
A lot of colours started flowing
all over the world.
People believed in colours.
And they became to wear colours.
But awareness came when
the Swadishthana Chakra broke.
Otherwise, you know how it was
everywhere,
they didn't believe in any colour.
And even they started painting
with more colourful things.
At that time, abstraction of art
was much more prominent also.
About that time should be—
of course, it started breaking much earlier.
But it really broke about that time
that people wholly started displaying
abstract art after 1960.
Before that, it was sort of,
everybody used to laugh at it
and say, you know,
Picasso was the one.
But Picasso also didn't go
to that extent.
But later on, I think,
the lines broke
and the colour started flowing
and people started believing in colours.
It was an abstraction of matter.
People started going to that side of it.
After the Swadishthana Chakra,
the Nabhi Chakra started opening.
The Nabhi Chakra problem was
that people started feeling
that there's nothing in the plastic.
Nothing in these things
that you are possessing.
But it is the Lakshmi part of it
that matter is a thing
that is for its aesthetic
and not for its value in the market.
So people started thinking
about the Lakshmi part of it,
that how we can take something
that is expensive but is beautiful.
It is like the plastic and all that
really came up with Swadishthana.
It started breaking down.
It is here once upon a time
plastic was regarded as a strength.
And then it broke down, you see.
The awareness recently had passed
so quickly from one to another.
It has never happened before
in that short time.
If you see it in the 50 years of time,
it happened like that.
So they started taking
to the Lakshmi side of the matter,
that it should be decorating,
it should be joy-giving.
And so then all these would be
more awareness towards the antique also
developed, that people said,
"What's happening with plastic?"
This awareness came in.
Then came the Heart Chakra.
And with the Heart Chakra,
people started thinking
about the pollution part of it and all this,
that was affecting the security
of human beings.
They were so aware!
I mean, nobody was aware of it.
People became suddenly aware of it
because it was people making more control
that maybe their existence
will be endangered,
sort of thing came up.
And that's how people became very aware
of the pollution and things then.
And with the sense of security only,
at that time,
with the atomic bomb,
that atomic bomb came in.
It came as really
as a protective measure for them.
But then it is a rational thing,
because that really frightened everyone.
You see, the German
that was using this stuff
started frightening you.
And you said, "Now, if you try to use
this again,
it's going to destroy all of us".
And that's how, you see,
we jumped into another awareness,
where people started feeling,
"This world, what is it we've got?
We have done one atomic bomb,
we've done this, we have done that.
And what have we achieved?
Where are we?"
Sort of things, you started
thinking about.
It's such, the science and everything
that we have done now.
It's not the one that we were seeking.
There's something beyond.
And this became a very, very strong
feeling in the West.
And after, I think, 1960,
great souls started coming.
From 60 onwards,
very, very great souls started coming.
Because they thought that,
"Well, the time has come now
for us to come down and help".
But still there are so many of them
awaiting.
Now, from 1960 to, say, 1970,
ten-year time, was the most crucial time.
And the 60 to 70 time was the time
when seekers started becoming conscious
about their own Realization.
60 to 70, the seeking became
a sort of a real mass of great people.
And they were just so restless
that they didn't know what to do,
where to seek,
and they were just breaking their heads
from 60 to 70.
At 70, it happened.
Now, as you all know,
that it is a living process,
like a tree growing.
And the tree, when it grows,
it doesn't go according to its planning,
but according to its own time.
But there is, of course, a season.
And the season comes in.
But in the case of Sahaja Yoga,
the whole process is sahaj.
But the whole continuous process of God
is not based at all on the seasons
that He would create,
but the seasons that you would create.
It's a different touch,
that the season is to be created also
by the seeker.
So, it is what happens
in the evolutionary stages.
A person reaches a certain stage,
one person,
and then he creates
a kind of a season.
Then the people come up.
Then he reaches a certain point.
He creates another kind of a season,
and then people come up.
It happens like that.
I never knew that it would happen
that early,
that I would be forced
to attain of that kind.
And it just happened,
because I saw something terrible happening.
I was among some people,
which I will tell you later on
about the place where I was.
The place is known as Nargol,
where I was with many other people.
And there was a satanic person
who was doing satanic rules.
And I could see, and I was unhappy.
And I just felt at that time
that, "The time has come now".
Because once it is expressed,
then people will become aware.
And that was the time
when I just pushed my Kundalini up.
So, once the Kundalini came up,
I see the Sahasrara of the Virata.
And I saw the Kundalini of the Virata.
That was of mine,
but how I saw it, I must tell you.
I saw it from the side,
and I saw it in a slanting way.
In a slanting way.
I saw it in all angles,
the Kundalini was.
And it opened out like a 'thak,
thak, thak, thak'.
I saw it opening up like that,
going up, going up.
And I saw it in all angles coming
before Me,
so that I could know
where was the problem.
Sort of, I took out myself to see it,
how it worked.
And there was this whole process
in that Kundalini
and it was in different colours,
you know all the different colours
there are if you heat it up.
Like if you have the iron
being heated up in the furnace,
the colour was like that.
It was red, and then another colour,
and another colour, and another colour.
One after another,
the colour was coming.
And I saw it coming up,
bubbling, like that.
And the thing opened out
like a telescope.
And then I saw, of course,
the Agnya.
And Agnya was a narrow place,
no doubt, but still, it came into it.
And then I saw the Sahasrara.
And Sahasrara was like a huge,
big lotus, very huge, big lotus.
But, you see, you can see with two eyes:
if you see as God,
then you really see the whole.
But as a human being,
I saw a lotus like this, so big as that.
So big only, not more than that.
I think, perhaps in your brain,
it's not so much big.
And in my brain also
must be so much big.
But if you see as a big person,
then you see your own big brain.
But when you see as a small person,
you see that little brain of yours.
And it was all, to Me,
what should you say, pulsating.
And in the lower portion of the
Sahasrara was a reddish colour.
And all the colours were there.
But I think the violet was not on top.
Violet was on the fringes.
But ending up into crystal colour,
absolutely white crystal colour.
And the two sides of the ego
and super-ego just fell like that.
And it opened out, opened out like that.
And inside was the yellow of the Agnya,
I saw, very clearly, golden yellow.
And inside the yellow was this small,
small little substance, also clearly,
it opened out.
And the Sahasrara opened out like that.
And the Kundalini started pouring in,
constantly with heart and then it filled up.
It was very beautiful feeling.
And then I felt a torrential rain,
completely coming on earth, completely.
That's the Grace I was feeling.
Like the rain of…
but it's very smooth and very silent,
an effect suddenly coming down
on the earth.
And I felt the whole earth
was completely filled,
completely filled with that Grace,
completely drenched,
and there was nothing left of it,
like absolutely dissolved, every part of earth.
And then I knew the time has come.
But in the awareness, I said,
"Get out now".
You now can feel the collective
awareness.
I knew it was satanic.
And that was the fifth day of May.
I should say,
it was done near the sea shore.
And for two nights I had not slept.
I was just staying there, near the sea.
I didn't eat anything.
I should get into the pool,
come back, again sit down.
And just, I was just thinking
how to cleanse the world,
or universe, or whatever you may call it.
That this should happen.
And it worked.
Because, you know, I reached the point
where I felt that,
"It is important now.
There's no more to be fulfilled.
It has to be done".
And it happened.
And when it happened,
I felt the whole thing, sort of…
It is something like an ocean of bliss
filling up every bit of it.
Everywhere now it acts and it works.
And that's why, when you get
your Realization,
you get a move—how it works out,
how it sprouts, how it helps you,
and how it acts on you,
without even your knowledge.
And then, you can also see it sometimes.
I mean, I don't know,
I can see it all the time.
But in India, it is much more,
that if you see in the sky,
you see them just like, like commas,
like small commas.
You see them glittering in the air.
It's just the atmosphere itself
that's like half commas.
You can see them in the air.
And that's what it is.
Because that Grace which came on this
earth, broke into these small commas
and spread out everywhere.
And that acts.
And that's how now you know the reality.
This is what it is.
And tonight I'm going to tell you
about reality, what this reality is.
Because so far, whatever you have known,
has been all unreal.
Now you know what this reality is.
And this reality is very different
from that.
I mean, the whole thing is changed now.
The whole drama is over.
Now you know it was a drama.
So now you have come to another world.
And this is another thing.
And that is why today
is a very important day.
That it is important for you
that God in his grace and compassion
has done this.
And it's more important for you
that now you can dissolve into it,
to be assimilated into that,
to be one with that,
to be that instead of thinking
of the past.
That was all a myth. It's over.
Now the myth is over.
Your eyes are open.
So, forget about your past,
and forget what you have done.
Even what your so-called sins
you have committed is all over now,
finished.
There's nothing to do with it,
it's all over.
Come to the present
which comes in this beautiful world
of collective consciousness,
where you realize that you are a part
and parcel of that great Being.
And you are not alone.
And you are to be cured,
and you are to be all right,
and you are to be perfectly in harmony
with the great Being.
If the great Being has told you
to do that.
So, you don't have to bother much
about things that happened.
Because now you have come into it.
But only thing is, you have to go
deeper and deeper and deeper
into yourself
and deny all that is superficial
and become that what you are.
It is a force that should love,
really it should love
and should melt in that.
It's meant to do that.
It should dissolve itself.
It's a tremendous force.
It is not a receding force as we say
or a very sort of a compromising force.
It is not an aggressive force also.
But it is the force,
all others are useless things.
It is the light.
The light has no end
and the darkness has to go.
Because there is no light,
that's why there is darkness.
So when the light comes in,
it doesn't mean it is aggressing
the darkness.
No, it is not.
Because the light is there,
the darkness has disappeared.
That's why you have to face this fact
that you are the light.
And when you see,
you should be the light.
And you should not be afraid
as to how to please others,
how to be kind to others,
nothing else as such is needed.
You are speaking with authority itself.
It's the greatest kindness.
Because then you tell them,
that this is the truth.
Like a child afraid of a snake
lying on the ground.
And you should tell the child,
"No, this is not a snake.
Just see this. It is not a snake.
It's just an ordinary rope".
Is there anything wrong
in such an assertion?
So a Sahaja Yogi has
a very direct responsibility.
Unless and until you have that kind
of a personality,
you cannot emit or reflect that.
You may receive it,
but that reflection has to come.
You have to give it.
And so I would like you today,
that you dissolve within yourself.
That not only you receive it,
but you emit it with confidence,
not with aggression,
but with confidence.
There is nothing to bend before
the people who are in the myth.
If you have known the reality,
it is better you tell them, fast.
Before you sit with them and try
to keep them down, sit there.
No, you have to tell them,
"No, no, no, no.
This is the thing we found out.
It's the fact. It's the truth.
We have felt, it is so.
There is God and He looks after us.
And it is He who manages everything.
He does everything.
You are just living with a myth!"
It definitely helps, your confidence.
And that's what today I bless you with,
that you get to God.
But the whole universe gets
its confidence in righteousness,
in virtue, and in divine providence.
Complete confidence into that.
Now we are going to have the puja.
Those who have come for the first time,
I would like one or two of them
to come down
if they believe in Sahaja Yoga.
Now, it may be very difficult
for people to come up
and to understand why to have puja.
Now, you see, these small little things
that you see are your own symbols.
All right?
But what you do is a symbol
of your love.
Those symbols are very important
because the Unconscious understands
the symbols
and gives you also symbols.
So when you do this puja, I tell you,
what happens: the Unconscious sees it
and is there.
It's a very simple thing
if you understand
that puja has nothing to do
with a particular flower as such.
But it's very subtle feeling
that is inside,
that when you are giving the flower
to the Unconscious,
it accepts and it emits more love.
And through that,
people have come out very fast.
It's a very fast-moving Kundalini,
when it is drenched in the puja like this,
it moves very fast, it clears you.
And you really need that to go to God.
That's how you feel this puja's
vibrations then you'll be sorted out.
So, don't be sceptical about it.
Only, keep yourself open.
Because to undergo a puja
is not easy for Me,
because I get tremendous vibrations.
I need at least 10,000 people
to absorb that.
And with very few people, it's difficult.
So, very difficult for Me, you know,
and I get… then I have to see God
who takes them back.
But the more you absorb,
the more you are going to help.
And I will be helped too.
You see, I can't live without you
and you can't live without Me.
It's a mutual problem.
So, it's a fact. I tell you that.
And I have to surrender
to your humanness that you absorb.
Because your absorption
is going to reduce the obstacle.
This is what it is.
It's absolutely mutual,
as the rapport of that.
So, there is nothing that I am giving
to you or you are giving.
Because as I said, that you give Me
something, I give you something.
Now, supposing if somebody makes you
stand with all these things on the head.
Supposing, now say it like this.
You'll be tired.
In the same way, when you give it to Me,
you see, the load that I have,
you must take also.
It's a simple given thing business.
And it is nothing more than that.
But it's beautiful
because when you get it,
when you get it in such a supreme state,
it's a beautiful state
that you can remember this state.
Because that remembrance
and that memory
will always bring you again back to it.
Here are the formatted subtitles:
Now, I would say that you can call,
you two can come to make the puja
if you like. And I think,
you have not been before?
David you have done.
You've been before? No.
Who else is there?
No, of course. I know.
She is very much there. I know.
Yes, come along.
So, those who have not been.
She's very good.
Who else?
Mataji, I must go now.
All right. May God bless you.
You
come here. Sit down here.
You also come here.
Now, who else is there?
You have done it? No Patricia?
Then you come here. Four of you.
Bala, have you?
No, you never came
for a puja before? Yes.
I don't know. Did you? No.
Let him come out there.
Five of you.
Five is a good idea.
Come forward.
First, you will be sitting right here.
And you can sit there.
Later on, you can give it
in the puja also.
Alex, you've done puja before?
One in [unclear].
You did it.
Or you can sit otherwise. Good idea.
Come along.
Come along, come along.
All of you come here.
Hello. How are you?
I have been asking for you.
May God bless you.
You could come, I am so happy.
We all have been waiting for you
to come down here.
You got drenched?
Give him something to wipe his hair.
Oh, it's all wet.
No, no, no.
Give him some towel, please.
Let him have some towel.
Give him something to brush. Yes.
David, you also join here
because you have not been before
to this puja. So, come along.
Wipe your hair. And you join here.
If it's little higher.
It will be better for him
for washing. You can give him
a chair or something.
It would be better
for him.
Yes. Any better?
Give a bandhan.
Better
now?
Are
you all right at the Agnya?
First is, the first and foremost,
the one who is created the first
is Shri Ganesha.
He is the innocence
and he is the one who came
on this earth
as our Lord Jesus Christ.
And he is the one who is to be
respected at every chakra.
Then he crosses every chakra,
you have to certify
because he is innocence
and he is the one
who is giving you the blessing.
So he is to be worshipped
every moment
but first of all, at the beginning
of any work or any prayers,
you have to ask him that,
"If there is any hurdle",
you can put your hand like this
and say,
"If there is any hurdle
in ourselves or anything,
please remove it
and be our guide".
Because he is the one
who removes all the hurdle
and he is the one
who gives us wisdom.
"Please grant us wisdom
and remove all the hurdle
of this worship of ours.
If there is any worship
that is done through us
in a wrong way, forgive us
and you guide us
in the proper line".
This is what you have to ask,
guidance from him.
So this is the symbol now
we have in Sahaja Yoga.
This is the symbol
of Shri Ganesha we have got.
You see, this is the symbol
because this one is in the form,
it emits.
Now you can see its vibrations,
now you are Realised.
Improved?
But every Ganesha is not like this,
you see.
You can get so many of these.
They are very [unclear].
You see, this one is selected by Me.
That's why it was written
in the Ten Commandments that,
"You don't get any methods
because it's chaos."
When you get, you make mistakes.
And then you might have
opposite, opposite vibrations.
That's why it was chosen.
But here you feel its vibrations.
Now in India,
there are Ashtavinayaka,
eight of them have come out
of the Mother Earth itself.
Nobody has made them,
they are like that,
and they emit vibrations.
See now, it's all right?
You shouldn't feel now, this finger.
You'll be 'prasanna',
means you'll be happy.
It's all right.
I have brought mine also.
I have brought mine.
Now see. It's better now?
Better means what happens
to your thoughts,
they become much less
and they start shutting down.
Attention becomes concentrated
within yourself.
So in the human way we do it,
we announce it before.
The way we do our own child,
this is the same way
we should manage Vishuddhi,
we should talk.
This is known as 'asana'
for sitting down.
These things have been found out
by many saints,
that if you put these things,
you see, they create more vibrations.
And they create, they supply
something somehow.
Because these saints
have been sitting for ages
in that position.
And they wanted to find out
what is in them,
what should we do and all that.
So they found out
all these things, you see.
They have covered even such a subject
as what oil the mother uses,
what kind of things
she uses for her food.
All these things.
So her [unclear] also they found out.
It's something so surprising
sometimes,
the way they have explained it.
Yes, I say Devi Bhagawat
must be there,
but Devi Bhagawat is not
in the room, isn't it?
Devi Bhagawat is not here.
But you have got the names
of the Devi and all that?
Yes.
So that you can bring some of them,
so we can start reading them.
How many books do you have?
We have only one.
Only one?
Also,
please,
Lalita Sahasrarnama Devi.